2001 was a busy year Apple was popping
off Napster and Sega meanwhile threw in
their respective towels we got three new
game consoles one from a brand new
Challenger scientists found this little
guy and America had her worst day ever
and for those of us who still remember
all of that Windows XP holds a special
place in our hearts but was it really
that good or was it just better than the
Millennium Edition and Vista dumpster
fires that book ended it to find out we
gathered some of our young and young at
heart friends to see if they could
navigate Microsoft's most iconic Windows
ever there's lots more where that came
from but before we get to it there's one
more thing that came out in 2001 this
segue well not this one exactly one like
it wa does this thing even work not even
a little we're still going to get to our
sponsor though hetner with their new
Singapore location het's gdpr compliant
high performance Cloud servers are now
lowering latency on a global scale check
out their metered pay as you go options
using our link down below Windows XP was
chalk full of important Milestones it
was the first consumer version of
Windows to be based on the more stable
NT Kel it was the first to require
Microsoft product activation online and
it was the first major overhaul of the
start menu since it was introduced back
in Windows 95 it was also the first
Windows to use graphical effects like
Alpha compositing and drop Shadows to
pretty up the interface and it
introduced clear type for better
readability on LCD displays which were
just starting to approach affordability
for the home user there were also big
changes to the control panel Windows
Explorer networks and internet
connectivity multilanguage support and
multimedia tools many of which have
changed a fair bit since then so let's
see if our test subjects are able to
navigate our challenges I'm Katie and
I'm 18 years old I am McIntyre and I am
17 years old ah hi I'm Elijah Junior
writer here I am 26 years old and I have
actually never used Windows XP I've
never even used Windows 7 whoa Windows
XP is running on this display man I
haven't used this since like 2001 I
remember it was uh my favorite operating
system all the way until probably
Windows 10 you know the funny thing is
it actually looks really alike like
Windows hasn't actually changed all that
much WoW the local area connection with
the little two like monitors or whatever
oh my God I forgot all about this stuff
oh my God is the control panel the good
one oh I can't search anymore no I have
to actually hit the search button I want
you to set up the screen saver where is
it can I search for it try what was it
called again probably
pictures oh gosh this is bad oh my oh my
gosh it's right there oh that one for
sure oh that oh my God I forgot about
all the screen savers oh where's the
like pipes 3D pipes
[Applause]
yeah all right well properties obviously
desktop screen saver wait does this have
the the pipes hell yeah there you go it
has been applied so I think the first
person to go to properties to do that oh
where did everyone else go everyone El
went contr
the dog I forgot about the dog I
remember Merlin yeah Merlin was dope who
else Courtney Earl I don't remember
Courtney or Earl I mostly just remember
Merlin and Rover uh 100% using Merlin
switch why didn't he switch oh he's
going away and then he comes in what an
animation oh my God uh probably my
favorite thing that I used to do in XP
was turn everything off so that I could
get higher FPS in halflife and Counter
Strike
I took it sweet time all right my CD's
in now we need to open it does this
thing even open I don't think I've ever
even touched one of these things I'm
trying not to break it I have no clue
okay now it's I've just gotten a bunch
of options of different audio I can play
the
audio copy it play it from different I
think apps I think I don't know how to
do it no there's no copy just this is
enable and disable selected tracks is
there anything C
right um oh yeah copy music oh there
okay oh this will be easy I want track
one and I want track six and I want
track nine let's do one and
24 wait now the 24 is gone okay this
makes no sense okay now they're all gone
now they're all unchecked what oh I can
hear it it's oh the high pitch is
actually really annoying it's doing a
some sort of coil wine of some sort well
it sounds like coil wine I don't know
it's actually coil wine but like it it's
that type of sound is it
done holy crap this takes forever I
could probably Google this CD faster on
YouTube go to a youtube. mpp3 ripper
don't do that by the way and then rip it
faster than this this is crazy hey I got
my my three songs all right good work
now I want you to make an audio CD with
those tracks insert blank SE okay well
conveniently there there's a BL CD right
here why are you so BR on it it's a CD
they're they scratch like these do they
oh okay now it's copying to the CD nice
first one's
done this is mine here you go there we
go did you do I I did 15 and 16 okay so
oh yeah yes sweet I got my own CD now
right just clicking your drags no it's
not click and drag oh copy insert blank
CD I
did a little
closer huh they look the exact same what
do you mean look closer at the
drives one says LG one says DVD is it
because this one
says SEC your disc or super
multi yeah the super multi is what
you're after okay
copy holy this is the fast version
that's crazy to me dude this would drive
me like if my Windows 10 or Windows 11
computer was acting this slow I would
immediately be reinstalling I'd be like
something's wrong I forgot how long
you'd put a CD in and you'd like rip it
and then you'd walk away for a while cuz
it actually takes some time what a
process we just don't even do this
anymore wow I get to open it I get the
privilege
sheesh
[Music]
amazing smells like 2,000 baby which
one's what it should say on them select
the programs you want to
install I see it okay okay oh there it
goes it's installing oh insert Microsoft
Suite disc 2 and then why do it ask me
to do dis 2 I yeah back in the day and
this is after floppies too cuz you used
to have to do this with floppies as well
where you'd get like a stack of floppies
and then you'd install them dis by dis
and then CDs came out and they could
hold a lot more information and that was
great but you still had to do a lot of
things one by one I remember installing
Diablo I and you could skip part of the
install but you wouldn't get the
cinematics cuz they were all on like dis
3 or whatever all right let's see if
this just Auto launches it did setup wow
this may take several minutes that's
very true it would take even longer if
it was on a hard drive with which
everyone had back
then all programs holy crap this is the
worst organization I've ever seen in my
entire
life could not find streets and trips on
this machine oh disc on this machine oh
do I need to
oh okay what the hell is the point of
installing the program if I have to
reinsert the disc
anyways so it'll install what it needs
to run
oh is that just because like people
didn't have hard drives like big enough
back then probably a lot ofes yeah okay
we did
it wait how do I oh God I just H oh I
can search lonus no that wouldn't work
cuz
it's what's our address right here would
be the
office that doesn't look anymore yeah it
does not look like this I found the
office let's go all right now let's doc
Linus his exact address is I want to go
to cheatcc.com cheat Cod Central because
back then you could actually cheat in
video games without like hacking wow
member of the week this guy I don't know
who he is but sure oh my God GameCube
free CCC email DVD PlayStation codes you
go to codes and you'd find codes and
you'd enter them in you'd have to search
by oh my God you'd search be like I want
to play I want the crash band cheat
codes and then you scroll down oh yeah
cool borders 4 man this
sucks is this because we're using web
archive or is this how long it would
take to load a website back then little
call Little okay there's an Athlon
xp800 is
that oh and a motherboard so that's a
combo 160 CAD for a motherboard CPU
combo that's pretty good A Broadband
router
60 gig hard drive $140 Canadian
dollars uh do you want to not be able to
install the newest Call of Duty here's
$140 have a good
day that's crazy you play a lot of
pitball nope played once in an arcade
machine in a bowling alley but that's
about it this was like the hot new game
that came out with this version of
Windows Bas yeah that's pretty
sad yeah it's I got a new computer you
want to play play Pinball with me here
we go he was right here or is this a
girl why' you hit her no I didn't hit
her I'm right where the arrow oh yeah
now I hit her my bad yo GTA 3 no max
pain I love Max pain yo I want what's
this monitor is it 1920 yeah hell yeah I
want anti aling off
yeah High settings everything's on high
let's see how this game runs baby oh
dude this is like 30 60 oh God my frames
dropped oh God there's another
one such a cool game dude this game is
sick man it makes me
respect where we're at now for operating
systems I think like even even just the
simple things like hitting windows and
search or the load times for things you
know as much as I
reminisce and like to think I miss XP
it's really easy to just fly through
Windows 11 there's a lot of like
submenus that I originally was like oh
why' they get rid of all these but once
you get used to it it's so much faster
looking back then Windows XP really was
a huge step in the path toward modern
Windows 95 and '98 deserve some credit
they had vastly more usable interfaces
than what came before them but they did
nothing to solve the issues that were
inherent with the dos-based reality that
was behind behind the curtains 2000
addressed a lot of the stability and
security concerns thanks to its business
grade NT kernel but it was only intended
for business users and was priced to
match so it fell to XP to bring those
benefits to the average user and aside
from just stability there are glimpses
of the future all over Windows XP the
start menu moved away from the
monolithic all programs list in favor of
highlighting your most used app it had
improved search meaning you didn't have
to go digging for things quite so often
and it had improved networking and
internet features that were Central to
ushering in the always connected world
we live in now where most of what we do
on a computer is in a web browser say
with Wikipedia rather than loaded onto
our machine with a disc like uh
Microsoft and Carta speaking of
mind-blowing things this will probably
blow our younger viewers minds but
thumbnails slideshows and the task pain
those didn't exist before Windows XP and
while auto run wasn't new there was
finally enough functionality in the
operating system and bundled apps for it
to be genuinely useful as we saw in our
music ripping and our disc burning
challenges so XP you know what you stood
up to the test of time even if your
usability could have been a little
better just like this segue could have
been a little better to our sponsor
aonis managing your organization's it
can be quite difficult if you don't have
a clear view of what's going on it can
almost feel like playing whack-a-mole
but you're blindfolded and you're
driving a car and the volume is cranked
to the max you guys get the point but
with acronis cyber protect you get a
combination of security backup and
Recovery that are all bundled into one
easyto use AI enhanced platform that
reduces your Reliance on Central it you
can enjoy Ultra secure backup and
recovery for multi-site environments
manage remote endpoints run
vulnerability assessments and handle
patch management through a single
console plus with centralizing things
into a single platform you save on the
hassle and cost of dealing with multiple
vendors so use our Link in the video
description and see for yourself how you
can simplify your business's data
protection and cyber security with aonis
cyber protect if you guys enjoyed this
video maybe go check out the one where
we had young people try Windows
95 they struggled even more